docs/JAX_for_LLM_pretraining.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  main_language: python
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  name: python3
---

+++ {"id": "NIOXoY1xgiww"}

### Copyright 2024 Google LLC.

```{code-cell}
:id: XviGOo7EgmJS

# @title Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
# https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
```

+++ {"id": "rvP1eNN_pExM"}

This notebook demonstrates how to use JAX/Flax for LLM pretraining via data and tensor parallelism.

We will use Google TPUs and [SPMD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_program,_multiple_data) to train a language model `miniGPT`. Instead of using a GPU, you should use the free TPU on Colab or Kaggle for this tutorial.

+++ {"id": "hTmz5Cbco7n_"}

## Setup

Install JAX and Flax first. We will install Tiktoken for tokenization and Grain for data loading as well. Also confirm we have TPUs set up.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: 6zMsOIc7ouCO
outputId: b16b0781-d1bd-456a-9757-533562f581df
---
!pip install jax-ai-stack
!pip install -U tiktoken grain matplotlib

import jax
jax.devices()
```

+++ {"id": "OHzJ_bokoovZ"}

Get the [TinyStories dataset from Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/datasets/roneneldan/TinyStories). We only use the training split.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: wUjQsgQEmI1N
outputId: 431fc1e1-8f7b-4062-ec02-fbbbde4a90c4
---
!wget https://huggingface.co/datasets/roneneldan/TinyStories/resolve/main/TinyStories-train.txt?download=true -O TinyStories-train.txt
```

+++ {"id": "sKE2uUafLobI"}

Take care of the imports.

```{code-cell}
:id: MKYFNOhdLq98

import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp
import flax.nnx as nnx
import optax
from dataclasses import dataclass
import grain.python as pygrain
from jax.experimental import mesh_utils
from jax.sharding import Mesh, PartitionSpec as P, NamedSharding
import pandas as pd
import tiktoken
import time
```

+++ {"id": "rPyt7MV6prz1"}

## Build the model

One of the biggest advantages of JAX is how easy it is to enable parallelism. To demonstrate this, we are going to use 4-way data parallel and 2-way tensor parallel. Tensor parallelism is one kind of model parallelism, which shards model tensors; there are other kinds of model parallelism, which we won't cover in this tutorial.

As a background, data parallel means splitting a batch of training data into multiple parts (this is called sharding); this way you can use bigger batch sizes to accelerate training, if you have multiple devices that can run in parallel. On the other hand, you can shard not just the training data. Sometimes your model is so big that the model parameters don't fit on a single accelerator. In this case, tensor parallel helps splitting the parameter tensors within a model onto multiple accelerators so that the model can actually run. Both approaches can take advantage of modern accelerators. For example, TPU v2 on the free Colab tier offers 4 chips, each of which has 2 TPU cores. So this architeture works well with 4-way data parallel and 2-way tensor parallel.

To get a detailed understanding of how JAX automatic parallelism works, please refer to this [JAX tutorial](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sharded-computation.html). In our case to leverage parallelism, we first need to define a `Mesh`, which declares the TPU resources with 2 axes: `batch` axis as 4 and `model` axis as 2, which maps to the TPU v2 cores. Here, the `model` axis enables the tensor parallel for us.

```{code-cell}
:id: xuMlCK3Q8WJD

mesh = Mesh(mesh_utils.create_device_mesh((4, 2)), ('batch', 'model'))

### Alternative 8-way data parallel with only one line of code change.
### JAX enables quick experimentation with different partitioning strategies
### like this. We will come back to this point at the end of this tutorial.
# mesh = Mesh(mesh_utils.create_device_mesh((8, 1)), ('batch', 'model'))
```

+++ {"id": "_ZKdhNo98NgG"}

We are going to use the GPT-2 tokenizer via [Tiktoken](https://github.com/openai/tiktoken).

```{code-cell}
:id: iWbkk1V7-Isg

tokenizer = tiktoken.get_encoding("gpt2")
```

+++ {"id": "0XHQ0BQ9-KIj"}

To use model parallel, we need to tell JAX compiler how to shard the model tensors. We first use `PartitionSpec` (shorted to `P` in the code) to describe how to shard a tensor: in our case a tensor could be either sharded along the `model` axis or be replicated on other dimensions (which is denoted by `None`). [`NamedSharding`](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.sharding.html#jax.sharding.NamedSharding) can then specify how a model tensor is sharded across the devices mesh using a pair of `Mesh` and `PartitionSpec`.

Finally, we use `nnx.with_partitioning` to let the layers know that their tensors need to be shared/replicated according to our spec. You need to do this for every tensor/layer in your model.

```{code-cell}
:id: z0p-IHurrB9i

def causal_attention_mask(seq_len):
    return jnp.tril(jnp.ones((seq_len, seq_len)))

class TransformerBlock(nnx.Module):
    def __init__(self, embed_dim: int, num_heads: int, ff_dim: int, *, rngs: nnx.Rngs, rate: float = 0.1):
        self.mha = nnx.MultiHeadAttention(num_heads=num_heads,
                                          in_features=embed_dim,
                                          kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                          bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                          rngs=rngs)
        self.dropout1 = nnx.Dropout(rate=rate)
        self.layer_norm1 = nnx.LayerNorm(epsilon=1e-6,
                                         num_features=embed_dim,
                                         scale_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.ones_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                         bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                         rngs=rngs)
        self.linear1 = nnx.Linear(in_features=embed_dim,
                                  out_features=ff_dim,
                                  kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                  bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                  rngs=rngs)
        self.linear2 = nnx.Linear(in_features=ff_dim,
                                  out_features=embed_dim,
                                  kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                  bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                  rngs=rngs)
        self.dropout2 = nnx.Dropout(rate=rate)
        self.layer_norm2 = nnx.LayerNorm(epsilon=1e-6,
                                         num_features=embed_dim,
                                         scale_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.ones_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                         bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                         rngs=rngs)


    def __call__(self, inputs, training: bool = False):
        input_shape = inputs.shape
        _, seq_len, _ = input_shape

        # Create causal mask
        mask = causal_attention_mask(seq_len)

        # Apply MultiHeadAttention with causal mask
        attention_output = self.mha(
            inputs_q=inputs,
            mask=mask,
            decode=False
        )
        attention_output = self.dropout1(attention_output, deterministic=not training)
        out1 = self.layer_norm1(inputs + attention_output)

        # Feed-forward network
        ffn_output = self.linear1(out1)
        ffn_output = nnx.relu(ffn_output)
        ffn_output = self.linear2(ffn_output)
        ffn_output = self.dropout2(ffn_output, deterministic=not training)

        return self.layer_norm2(out1 + ffn_output)


class TokenAndPositionEmbedding(nnx.Module):

    def __init__(self, maxlen: int, vocab_size: int, embed_dim: int, *, rngs: nnx.Rngs):
        self.token_emb = nnx.Embed(num_embeddings=vocab_size, features=embed_dim, rngs=rngs)
        self.pos_emb = nnx.Embed(num_embeddings=maxlen, features=embed_dim, rngs=rngs)

    def __call__(self, x):
        positions = jnp.arange(0, x.shape[1])[None, :]
        position_embedding = self.pos_emb(positions)
        token_embedding = self.token_emb(x)
        return token_embedding + position_embedding


class MiniGPT(nnx.Module):
    def __init__(self, maxlen: int, vocab_size: int, embed_dim: int, num_heads: int, feed_forward_dim: int, num_transformer_blocks: int, rngs: nnx.Rngs):
        self.embedding_layer = TokenAndPositionEmbedding(
                    maxlen, vocab_size, embed_dim, rngs=rngs
                )
        self.transformer_blocks = [TransformerBlock(
            embed_dim, num_heads, feed_forward_dim, rngs=rngs
        ) for _ in range(num_transformer_blocks)]

        self.output_layer = nnx.Linear(in_features=embed_dim,
                                       out_features=vocab_size,
                                       kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                       bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                       rngs=rngs)

    def __call__(self, inputs, training: bool = False):
        x = self.embedding_layer(inputs)
        for transformer_block in self.transformer_blocks:
            x = transformer_block(x, training=training)
        outputs = self.output_layer(x)
        return outputs

    def generate_text(self, max_tokens: int, start_tokens: [int], top_k=10):
        def sample_from(logits):
            logits, indices = jax.lax.top_k(logits, k=top_k)
            logits = nnx.softmax(logits)
            return jax.random.choice(jax.random.PRNGKey(0), indices, p=logits)

        def generate_step(start_tokens):
            pad_len = maxlen - len(start_tokens)
            sample_index = len(start_tokens) - 1
            if pad_len < 0:
                x = jnp.array(start_tokens[:maxlen])
                sample_index = maxlen - 1
            elif pad_len > 0:
                x = jnp.array(start_tokens + [0] * pad_len)
            else:
                x = jnp.array(start_tokens)

            x = x[None, :]
            logits = self(x)
            next_token = sample_from(logits[0][sample_index])
            return next_token

        generated = []
        for _ in range(max_tokens):
            next_token = generate_step(start_tokens + generated)
            # Truncate whatever is after '<|endoftext|>' (stop word)
            if next_token == tokenizer.encode('<|endoftext|>', allowed_special={'<|endoftext|>'})[0]:
              break
            generated.append(int(next_token))
        return tokenizer.decode(start_tokens + generated)

def create_model(rngs):
    return MiniGPT(maxlen, vocab_size, embed_dim, num_heads, feed_forward_dim, num_transformer_blocks=4, rngs=rngs)
```

+++ {"id": "igX_eoGNMTGR"}

Set some hyperparameters.

```{code-cell}
:id: GRhiDsCrMZRp

vocab_size = tokenizer.n_vocab
num_transformer_blocks = 8
maxlen = 256
embed_dim = 256
num_heads = 8
feed_forward_dim = 256
batch_size = 256 # You can set a bigger batch size if using Kaggle TPU
num_epochs = 1
```

+++ {"id": "mI1ci-HyMspJ"}

## Prepare data

Data loading and preprocessing with [Grain](https://github.com/google/grain).

```{code-cell}
:id: rGUFsn1GMuzh

@dataclass
class TextDataset:
    data: list
    maxlen: int

    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.data)

    def __getitem__(self, idx: int):
        # Use Tiktoken for tokenization
        encoding = tokenizer.encode(self.data[idx], allowed_special={'<|endoftext|>'})[:self.maxlen]  # Tokenize and truncate
        return encoding + [0] * (self.maxlen - len(encoding))  # Pad to maxlen

def load_and_preprocess_data(file_path, batch_size, maxlen):

    with open(file_path, 'r') as f:
      text = f.read()

    stories = text.split('<|endoftext|>')
    stories = [story+'<|endoftext|>' for story in stories if story.strip()]
    df = pd.DataFrame({'text': stories})
    data = df['text'].dropna().tolist()
    dataset = TextDataset(data, maxlen)

    sampler = pygrain.IndexSampler(
        len(dataset),
        shuffle=False,
        seed=42,
        shard_options=pygrain.NoSharding(),
        num_epochs=num_epochs,
    )

    dl = pygrain.DataLoader(
        data_source=dataset,
        sampler=sampler,
        operations=[pygrain.Batch(batch_size=batch_size, drop_remainder=True)],
    )

    return dl

text_dl = load_and_preprocess_data('TinyStories-train.txt', batch_size, maxlen)
```

+++ {"id": "BKVSD8KSM1um"}

## Train the model

Define loss function and training step function.

```{code-cell}
:id: 8rRuTmABNV4b

def loss_fn(model, batch):
    logits = model(batch[0])
    loss = optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(logits=logits, labels=batch[1]).mean()
    return loss, logits

@nnx.jit
def train_step(model: MiniGPT, optimizer: nnx.Optimizer, metrics: nnx.MultiMetric, batch):
    grad_fn = nnx.value_and_grad(loss_fn, has_aux=True)
    (loss, logits), grads = grad_fn(model, batch)
    metrics.update(loss=loss, logits=logits, lables=batch[1])
    optimizer.update(grads)
```

+++ {"id": "5um2vkeUNckm"}

Start training. It takes ~50 minutes on Colab.

Note that for data parallel, we are sharding the training data along the `batch` axis using `jax.device_put` with `NamedeSharding`.

We are also using the `jax.vmap` transformation to produce the target sequences faster.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: Ysl6CsfENeJN
outputId: 52c31101-dfba-4d84-ff09-77063b14e1c9
---
model = create_model(rngs=nnx.Rngs(0))
optimizer = nnx.Optimizer(model, optax.adam(1e-3))
metrics = nnx.MultiMetric(
  loss=nnx.metrics.Average('loss'),
)
rng = jax.random.PRNGKey(0)

start_prompt = "Once upon a time"
start_tokens = tokenizer.encode(start_prompt)[:maxlen]
generated_text = model.generate_text(
    maxlen, start_tokens
)
print(f"Initial generated text:\n{generated_text}\n")


metrics_history = {
  'train_loss': [],
}

prep_target_batch = jax.vmap(lambda tokens: jnp.concatenate((tokens[1:], jnp.array([0]))))

step = 0
for epoch in range(num_epochs):
    start_time = time.time()
    for batch in text_dl:
        if len(batch) % len(jax.devices()) != 0:
          continue  # skip the remaining elements
        input_batch = jnp.array(jnp.array(batch).T)
        target_batch = prep_target_batch(input_batch)
        train_step(model, optimizer, metrics, jax.device_put((input_batch, target_batch), NamedSharding(mesh, P('batch', None))))

        if (step + 1) % 200 == 0:
          for metric, value in metrics.compute().items():
              metrics_history[f'train_{metric}'].append(value)
          metrics.reset()

          elapsed_time = time.time() - start_time
          print(f"Step {step + 1}, Loss: {metrics_history['train_loss'][-1]}, Elapsed Time: {elapsed_time:.2f} seconds")
          start_time = time.time()

          generated_text = model.generate_text(
              maxlen, start_tokens
          )
          print(f"Generated text:\n{generated_text}\n")
        step += 1

# Final text generation
generated_text = model.generate_text(
    maxlen, start_tokens
)
print(f"Final generated text:\n{generated_text}")
```

+++ {"id": "thaLs6TD0lt5"}

Visualize the training loss.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 472
id: B6Eg1Cz2y_iP
outputId: 6723dbea-4e62-4cc4-8885-a2bc56f44541
---
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.plot(metrics_history['train_loss'])
plt.title('Training Loss')
plt.xlabel('Step')
plt.ylabel('Loss')
plt.show()
```

+++ {"id": "WB-ExEt1Zl1C"}

As you can see, the model goes from generating completely random words at the beginning to generating sensible tiny stories at the end of the training. So essentially we have pretrained a small LLM to write tiny stories for us.

+++ {"id": "soPqiR1JNmjf"}

# Saving
Save the model checkpoint.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: EkoFGCgSZ1yz
outputId: fc901577-e9f5-4424-b1ba-d8c1ef78d7de
---
import orbax.checkpoint as orbax

state = nnx.state(model)

checkpointer = orbax.PyTreeCheckpointer()
checkpointer.save('/content/save', state)

# Make sure the files are there
!ls /content/save/
```

+++ {"id": "jCApVd7671c1"}

# Disconnect the Colab runtime

```{code-cell}
:id: NsqYdbrDVKSq

from google.colab import runtime
runtime.unassign()
```

+++ {"id": "Yj0vj28bIPwI"}

# One more thing

Remember in cell #4, we use 4-way data parallel and 2-way tensor parallel. Of course there are different ways to partition your model/data. For example, 8-way data parallel is another popular way. To switch to 8-way data parallel, uncomment the last line in cell # 4 to replace the `Mesh` definition with:

`mesh = Mesh(mesh_utils.create_device_mesh((8, 1)), ('batch', 'model'))`

JAX will automatically figure out how to shard the model and data to use the new partition strategy and nothing else need to be done. Re-connect the TPU runtime and run it again to see how it runs.

How simple and powerful is this! And that's the beauty of JAX automatic parallelism.

```{code-cell}
:id: BdF8SJkHVMiw


```

Commit message:

Address comments by silencing pip installs and adding title
Also re-ran the notebook

docs/JAX_for_LLM_pretraining.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  name: python3
---

+++ {"id": "NIOXoY1xgiww"}

# Pretraining an LLM using JAX

[![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/jax-ml/jax-ai-stack/blob/main/docs/JAX_for_LLM_pretraining.ipynb)

This tutorial demonstrates how to use JAX/Flax for LLM pretraining via data and tensor parallelism. It is originally inspired by this [Keras miniGPT tutorial](https://keras.io/examples/generative/text_generation_with_miniature_gpt/).

We will use Google TPUs and [SPMD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_program,_multiple_data) to train a language model `miniGPT`. Instead of using a GPU, you should use the free TPU on Colab or Kaggle for this tutorial.

+++ {"id": "hTmz5Cbco7n_"}

## Setup

Install JAX and Flax first. We will install Tiktoken for tokenization and Grain for data loading as well.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: 6zMsOIc7ouCO
outputId: 037d56a9-b18f-4504-f80a-3a4fa2945068
---
!pip install -q jax-ai-stack
!pip install -Uq tiktoken grain matplotlib
```

+++ {"id": "Rcji_799n4eA"}

Confirm we have TPUs set up.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: LS9sQEY3n0mB
outputId: 9ffcf3a6-20ef-4f80-b006-f5d3c5644a15
---
import jax
jax.devices()
```

+++ {"id": "OHzJ_bokoovZ"}

Get the [TinyStories dataset from Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/datasets/roneneldan/TinyStories). We only use the training split.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: wUjQsgQEmI1N
outputId: e6eff24e-5578-4277-a0f9-24e27bd91ee0
---
!wget https://huggingface.co/datasets/roneneldan/TinyStories/resolve/main/TinyStories-train.txt?download=true -O TinyStories-train.txt
```

+++ {"id": "sKE2uUafLobI"}

Take care of the imports.

```{code-cell}
:id: MKYFNOhdLq98

import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp
import flax.nnx as nnx
import optax
from dataclasses import dataclass
import grain.python as pygrain
from jax.experimental import mesh_utils
from jax.sharding import Mesh, PartitionSpec as P, NamedSharding
import pandas as pd
import tiktoken
import time
```

+++ {"id": "rPyt7MV6prz1"}

## Build the model

One of the biggest advantages of JAX is how easy it is to enable parallelism. To demonstrate this, we are going to use 4-way data parallel and 2-way tensor parallel. Tensor parallelism is one kind of model parallelism, which shards model tensors; there are other kinds of model parallelism, which we won't cover in this tutorial.

As a background, data parallel means splitting a batch of training data into multiple parts (this is called sharding); this way you can use bigger batch sizes to accelerate training, if you have multiple devices that can run in parallel. On the other hand, you can shard not just the training data. Sometimes your model is so big that the model parameters don't fit on a single accelerator. In this case, tensor parallel helps splitting the parameter tensors within a model onto multiple accelerators so that the model can actually run. Both approaches can take advantage of modern accelerators. For example, TPU v2 on the free Colab tier offers 4 chips, each of which has 2 TPU cores. So this architeture works well with 4-way data parallel and 2-way tensor parallel.

To get a detailed understanding of how JAX automatic parallelism works, please refer to this [JAX tutorial](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/Distributed_arrays_and_automatic_parallelization.html#way-batch-data-parallelism-and-2-way-model-tensor-parallelism). In our case to leverage parallelism, we first need to define a `Mesh`, which declares the TPU resources with 2 axes: `batch` axis as 4 and `model` axis as 2, which maps to the TPU v2 cores. Here, the `model` axis enables the tensor parallel for us.

```{code-cell}
:id: xuMlCK3Q8WJD

mesh = Mesh(mesh_utils.create_device_mesh((4, 2)), ('batch', 'model'))

### Alternative 8-way data parallel with only one line of code change.
### JAX enables quick experimentation with different partitioning strategies
### like this. We will come back to this point at the end of this tutorial.
# mesh = Mesh(mesh_utils.create_device_mesh((8, 1)), ('batch', 'model'))
```

+++ {"id": "_ZKdhNo98NgG"}

We are going to use the GPT-2 tokenizer via [Tiktoken](https://github.com/openai/tiktoken).

```{code-cell}
:id: iWbkk1V7-Isg

tokenizer = tiktoken.get_encoding("gpt2")
```

+++ {"id": "0XHQ0BQ9-KIj"}

To use model parallel, we need to tell JAX compiler how to shard the model tensors. We first use `PartitionSpec` (shorted to `P` in the code) to describe how to shard a tensor: in our case a tensor could be either sharded along the `model` axis or be replicated on other dimensions (which is denoted by `None`). [`NamedSharding`](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.sharding.html#jax.sharding.NamedSharding) can then specify how a model tensor is sharded across the devices mesh using a pair of `Mesh` and `PartitionSpec`.

Finally, we use `nnx.with_partitioning` to let the layers know that their tensors need to be shared/replicated according to our spec. You need to do this for every tensor/layer in your model.

```{code-cell}
:id: z0p-IHurrB9i

def causal_attention_mask(seq_len):
    return jnp.tril(jnp.ones((seq_len, seq_len)))

class TransformerBlock(nnx.Module):
    def __init__(self, embed_dim: int, num_heads: int, ff_dim: int, *, rngs: nnx.Rngs, rate: float = 0.1):
        self.mha = nnx.MultiHeadAttention(num_heads=num_heads,
                                          in_features=embed_dim,
                                          kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                          bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                          rngs=rngs)
        self.dropout1 = nnx.Dropout(rate=rate)
        self.layer_norm1 = nnx.LayerNorm(epsilon=1e-6,
                                         num_features=embed_dim,
                                         scale_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.ones_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                         bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                         rngs=rngs)
        self.linear1 = nnx.Linear(in_features=embed_dim,
                                  out_features=ff_dim,
                                  kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                  bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                  rngs=rngs)
        self.linear2 = nnx.Linear(in_features=ff_dim,
                                  out_features=embed_dim,
                                  kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                  bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P('model'))),
                                  rngs=rngs)
        self.dropout2 = nnx.Dropout(rate=rate)
        self.layer_norm2 = nnx.LayerNorm(epsilon=1e-6,
                                         num_features=embed_dim,
                                         scale_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.ones_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                         bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                         rngs=rngs)


    def __call__(self, inputs, training: bool = False):
        input_shape = inputs.shape
        _, seq_len, _ = input_shape

        # Create causal mask
        mask = causal_attention_mask(seq_len)

        # Apply MultiHeadAttention with causal mask
        attention_output = self.mha(
            inputs_q=inputs,
            mask=mask,
            decode=False
        )
        attention_output = self.dropout1(attention_output, deterministic=not training)
        out1 = self.layer_norm1(inputs + attention_output)

        # Feed-forward network
        ffn_output = self.linear1(out1)
        ffn_output = nnx.relu(ffn_output)
        ffn_output = self.linear2(ffn_output)
        ffn_output = self.dropout2(ffn_output, deterministic=not training)

        return self.layer_norm2(out1 + ffn_output)


class TokenAndPositionEmbedding(nnx.Module):

    def __init__(self, maxlen: int, vocab_size: int, embed_dim: int, *, rngs: nnx.Rngs):
        self.token_emb = nnx.Embed(num_embeddings=vocab_size, features=embed_dim, rngs=rngs)
        self.pos_emb = nnx.Embed(num_embeddings=maxlen, features=embed_dim, rngs=rngs)

    def __call__(self, x):
        positions = jnp.arange(0, x.shape[1])[None, :]
        position_embedding = self.pos_emb(positions)
        token_embedding = self.token_emb(x)
        return token_embedding + position_embedding


class MiniGPT(nnx.Module):
    def __init__(self, maxlen: int, vocab_size: int, embed_dim: int, num_heads: int, feed_forward_dim: int, num_transformer_blocks: int, rngs: nnx.Rngs):
        self.embedding_layer = TokenAndPositionEmbedding(
                    maxlen, vocab_size, embed_dim, rngs=rngs
                )
        self.transformer_blocks = [TransformerBlock(
            embed_dim, num_heads, feed_forward_dim, rngs=rngs
        ) for _ in range(num_transformer_blocks)]

        self.output_layer = nnx.Linear(in_features=embed_dim,
                                       out_features=vocab_size,
                                       kernel_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.xavier_uniform(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                       bias_init=nnx.with_partitioning(nnx.initializers.zeros_init(), NamedSharding(mesh, P(None, 'model'))),
                                       rngs=rngs)

    def __call__(self, inputs, training: bool = False):
        x = self.embedding_layer(inputs)
        for transformer_block in self.transformer_blocks:
            x = transformer_block(x, training=training)
        outputs = self.output_layer(x)
        return outputs

    def generate_text(self, max_tokens: int, start_tokens: [int], top_k=10):
        def sample_from(logits):
            logits, indices = jax.lax.top_k(logits, k=top_k)
            logits = nnx.softmax(logits)
            return jax.random.choice(jax.random.PRNGKey(0), indices, p=logits)

        def generate_step(start_tokens):
            pad_len = maxlen - len(start_tokens)
            sample_index = len(start_tokens) - 1
            if pad_len < 0:
                x = jnp.array(start_tokens[:maxlen])
                sample_index = maxlen - 1
            elif pad_len > 0:
                x = jnp.array(start_tokens + [0] * pad_len)
            else:
                x = jnp.array(start_tokens)

            x = x[None, :]
            logits = self(x)
            next_token = sample_from(logits[0][sample_index])
            return next_token

        generated = []
        for _ in range(max_tokens):
            next_token = generate_step(start_tokens + generated)
            # Truncate whatever is after '<|endoftext|>' (stop word)
            if next_token == tokenizer.encode('<|endoftext|>', allowed_special={'<|endoftext|>'})[0]:
              break
            generated.append(int(next_token))
        return tokenizer.decode(start_tokens + generated)

def create_model(rngs):
    return MiniGPT(maxlen, vocab_size, embed_dim, num_heads, feed_forward_dim, num_transformer_blocks=4, rngs=rngs)
```

+++ {"id": "igX_eoGNMTGR"}

Set some hyperparameters.

```{code-cell}
:id: GRhiDsCrMZRp

vocab_size = tokenizer.n_vocab
num_transformer_blocks = 8
maxlen = 256
embed_dim = 256
num_heads = 8
feed_forward_dim = 256
batch_size = 256 # You can set a bigger batch size if using Kaggle TPU
num_epochs = 1
```

+++ {"id": "mI1ci-HyMspJ"}

## Prepare data

Data loading and preprocessing with [Grain](https://github.com/google/grain).

```{code-cell}
:id: rGUFsn1GMuzh

@dataclass
class TextDataset:
    data: list
    maxlen: int

    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.data)

    def __getitem__(self, idx: int):
        # Use Tiktoken for tokenization
        encoding = tokenizer.encode(self.data[idx], allowed_special={'<|endoftext|>'})[:self.maxlen]  # Tokenize and truncate
        return encoding + [0] * (self.maxlen - len(encoding))  # Pad to maxlen

def load_and_preprocess_data(file_path, batch_size, maxlen):

    with open(file_path, 'r') as f:
      text = f.read()

    stories = text.split('<|endoftext|>')
    stories = [story+'<|endoftext|>' for story in stories if story.strip()]
    df = pd.DataFrame({'text': stories})
    data = df['text'].dropna().tolist()
    dataset = TextDataset(data, maxlen)

    sampler = pygrain.IndexSampler(
        len(dataset),
        shuffle=False,
        seed=42,
        shard_options=pygrain.NoSharding(),
        num_epochs=num_epochs,
    )

    dl = pygrain.DataLoader(
        data_source=dataset,
        sampler=sampler,
        operations=[pygrain.Batch(batch_size=batch_size, drop_remainder=True)],
    )

    return dl

text_dl = load_and_preprocess_data('TinyStories-train.txt', batch_size, maxlen)
```

+++ {"id": "BKVSD8KSM1um"}

## Train the model

Define loss function and training step function.

```{code-cell}
:id: 8rRuTmABNV4b

def loss_fn(model, batch):
    logits = model(batch[0])
    loss = optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(logits=logits, labels=batch[1]).mean()
    return loss, logits

@nnx.jit
def train_step(model: MiniGPT, optimizer: nnx.Optimizer, metrics: nnx.MultiMetric, batch):
    grad_fn = nnx.value_and_grad(loss_fn, has_aux=True)
    (loss, logits), grads = grad_fn(model, batch)
    metrics.update(loss=loss, logits=logits, lables=batch[1])
    optimizer.update(grads)
```

+++ {"id": "5um2vkeUNckm"}

Start training. It takes ~50 minutes on Colab.

Note that for data parallel, we are sharding the training data along the `batch` axis using `jax.device_put` with `NamedeSharding`.

We are also using the `jax.vmap` transformation to produce the target sequences faster.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: Ysl6CsfENeJN
outputId: 5dd06dca-f030-4927-a9b6-35d412da535c
---
model = create_model(rngs=nnx.Rngs(0))
optimizer = nnx.Optimizer(model, optax.adam(1e-3))
metrics = nnx.MultiMetric(
  loss=nnx.metrics.Average('loss'),
)
rng = jax.random.PRNGKey(0)

start_prompt = "Once upon a time"
start_tokens = tokenizer.encode(start_prompt)[:maxlen]
generated_text = model.generate_text(
    maxlen, start_tokens
)
print(f"Initial generated text:\n{generated_text}\n")


metrics_history = {
  'train_loss': [],
}

prep_target_batch = jax.vmap(lambda tokens: jnp.concatenate((tokens[1:], jnp.array([0]))))

step = 0
for epoch in range(num_epochs):
    start_time = time.time()
    for batch in text_dl:
        if len(batch) % len(jax.devices()) != 0:
          continue  # skip the remaining elements
        input_batch = jnp.array(jnp.array(batch).T)
        target_batch = prep_target_batch(input_batch)
        train_step(model, optimizer, metrics, jax.device_put((input_batch, target_batch), NamedSharding(mesh, P('batch', None))))

        if (step + 1) % 200 == 0:
          for metric, value in metrics.compute().items():
              metrics_history[f'train_{metric}'].append(value)
          metrics.reset()

          elapsed_time = time.time() - start_time
          print(f"Step {step + 1}, Loss: {metrics_history['train_loss'][-1]}, Elapsed Time: {elapsed_time:.2f} seconds")
          start_time = time.time()

          generated_text = model.generate_text(
              maxlen, start_tokens
          )
          print(f"Generated text:\n{generated_text}\n")
        step += 1

# Final text generation
generated_text = model.generate_text(
    maxlen, start_tokens
)
print(f"Final generated text:\n{generated_text}")
```

+++ {"id": "thaLs6TD0lt5"}

Visualize the training loss.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 472
id: B6Eg1Cz2y_iP
outputId: 7cafe711-1ae4-4eb9-fd37-e1bde54cbfc5
---
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.plot(metrics_history['train_loss'])
plt.title('Training Loss')
plt.xlabel('Step')
plt.ylabel('Loss')
plt.show()
```

+++ {"id": "WB-ExEt1Zl1C"}

As you can see, the model goes from generating completely random words at the beginning to generating sensible tiny stories at the end of the training. So essentially we have pretrained a small LLM to write tiny stories for us.

+++ {"id": "soPqiR1JNmjf"}

# Saving
Save the model checkpoint.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: EkoFGCgSZ1yz
outputId: 3467b8ba-ce05-42f0-fb89-75922cc91e31
---
import orbax.checkpoint as orbax

state = nnx.state(model)

checkpointer = orbax.PyTreeCheckpointer()
checkpointer.save('/content/save', state)

# Make sure the files are there
!ls /content/save/
```

+++ {"id": "jCApVd7671c1"}

# Disconnect the Colab runtime

```{code-cell}
:id: NsqYdbrDVKSq

from google.colab import runtime
runtime.unassign()
```

+++ {"id": "Yj0vj28bIPwI"}

# One more thing

Remember in cell #5, we use 4-way data parallel and 2-way tensor parallel. Of course there are different ways to partition your model/data. For example, 8-way data parallel is another popular way. To switch to 8-way data parallel, uncomment the last line in cell # 4 to replace the `Mesh` definition with:

`mesh = Mesh(mesh_utils.create_device_mesh((8, 1)), ('batch', 'model'))`

JAX will automatically figure out how to shard the model and data to use the new partition strategy and nothing else need to be done. Re-connect the TPU runtime and run it again to see how it runs.

How simple and powerful is this! And that's the beauty of JAX automatic parallelism.

```{code-cell}
:id: BdF8SJkHVMiw


```
